$Header: /u/drspeech/repos/quicknet2/README,v 1.9 2005/06/01 22:03:10 davidj Exp $

This is the README file for "QuickNet", a set of programs and
libraries that can be used to train MLPs (multi-layer perceptrons, a
type of "neural net").  QuickNet is focused on high-performance MLP
training and use for audio processing, although it may be applicable
to other domains.

For instructions on how to install the package, read the associated
`INSTALL' file.  For some preliminary information of use to those
using or modifying the sources, read the associated `README-hacker'
file (which is no doubt very out of date).

The library was developed by the Speech Group at the International
Computer Science Institute, Berkeley, California
(http://www.ICSI.Berkeley.EDU/Speech/).  The original coding was done
by David Johnson (http://www.icsi.berkeley.edu/~davidj) with guidance
and inspiration provided by Nelson Morgan.  Significant additions were
made by Dan Ellis, Chuck Wooters and Chris Oei.

Note that this is actually the README for QuickNet version 3 which was
branched from the original version of QuickNet, version 1, in early
2004.  See the `NEWS' file for the differences between QuickNet 1 and
QuickNet 3.

For more details on QuickNet, please see the QuickNet web page
(http://www.icsi.berkeley.edu/Speech/qn.html) or contact
<quicknet-info@ICSI.Berkeley.EDU>.  Be aware that QuickNet is not
supported in any official manner.  However, well-documented bug
reports that include logs and a way for data files to be accessed
(e.g. by FTP) may well get acted upon.


QuickNet is Copyright (c) 1997-2005 The International Computer Science
Institute.  All rights reserved.  See the file "COPYING" in the source
directory for more details.
